We’ve all had the dream of traveling back in time. Whether there’s a wrong we want to right, a mistake we want to undo, a life we want to save, or a horror story we want to prevent, the amount of good we could accomplish seems immeasurable. We haven’t gured out how to do it, and there might be a fundamental reason why time travel to the past is impossible.

Could Doc Brown from Back To The Future have been right? That’s what Alex Knapp wants to know, as he asks:

My 8 year old watched the Back to the Future movies for the rst time and would like to know if, as Doc Brown suggests, the creation of a temporal paradox could unravel the space-time continuum and destroy the entire universe?

It might be a little hyperbolic, but temporal paradoxes are more than a little worrisome. Let’s think about why.


Looking back to great cosmic distances is akin to looking back in time. We are 13.8 billion years since the Big Bang where we are, but the Big Bang also occurred everywhere else we can see. The light-travel-time to those galaxies means we’re seeing those distant regions as they were in the past. And the past, itself, unfolded in one particular way out of the myriad of possibilities to lead to the Universe today. (NASA, ESA, AND A. FEILD (STSCI))


When it comes to the way the Universe actually is today, you have to realize how unlikely this particular outcome was. Over the course of 13.8 billion years, just the visible part of our Universe has seen all the particles within it — numbering somewhere around 1090 — interact and collide with one another countless times.

It’s only through those interactions that we formed stars and galaxies on the largest scales, but also the heavy elements, organic molecules, and planets (like Earth) that allow life to have arisen.

Some of the atoms and molecules found in space in the Magellanic cloud, as imaged by the Spitzer Space Telescope. The creation of heavy elements, organic molecules, water, and rocky planets were all necessary for us to have even a chance of coming about.

The path our planet took to bring each one of us about has been a string of extraordinarily unlikely outcomes, due to the sheer number of possibilities that the Universe could have admitted. A tiny change that might have been imperceptible a decade ago, like whether a buzzing y caught your attention or not, might have been the di erence between whether you noticed the future love-of-your-life or not. The fall of your foot along a hiking trail could be the di erence between whether a young, poisonous snake emerged and bit you or not.